ARROW-15576: [Java][Doc] Document VectorSchemaRoots for 2D data (#12634)
apache/arrow: docs/source/java/vector_schema_root.rst

.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

.. default-domain:: java
.. highlight:: java

============
Tabular Data
============

While arrays (aka: :doc:`ValueVector <./vector>`) represent a one-dimensional sequence of
homogeneous values, data often comes in the form of two-dimensional sets of
heterogeneous data (such as database tables, CSV files...). Arrow provides
several abstractions to handle such data conveniently and efficiently.

Fields
======

> Fields are used to denote the particular columns of a table.

Reviewer: Wait, sorry I missed this. We should not talk about tables in Java. Since we haven't introduced VectorSchemaRoot yet, we can talk about "tabular data" abstractly.

> Fields are used to denote the particular columns of a table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fields are used to denote the particular columns of tabular data.
```

Schemas
=======

A `Schema`_ describes the overall structure consisting of any number of columns. It holds a sequence of fields together
with some optional schema-wide metadata (in addition to per-field metadata).

.. code-block:: Java

    // Create a schema describing datasets with two columns:
    // a int32 column "A" and a utf8-encoded string column "B"
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.ArrowType;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Field;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.FieldType;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Schema;
    import static java.util.Arrays.asList;

    Map<String, String> metadata = new HashMap<>();
    metadata.put("K1", "V1");
    metadata.put("K2", "V2");
    Field a = new Field("A", FieldType.nullable(new ArrowType.Int(32, true)), null);
    Field b = new Field("B", FieldType.nullable(new ArrowType.Utf8()), null);
    Schema schema = new Schema(asList(a, b), metadata);

VectorSchemaRoot
================

.. note::

    VectorSchemaRoot is somewhat analogous to tables and record batches in the other Arrow implementations
    in that they all are 2D datasets, but the usage is different.

> A :class:`VectorSchemaRoot` is a container that can hold batches, batches flow through :class:`VectorSchemaRoot`

Reviewer: Not so sure about this since we haven't introduced batches yet at this point…but we can revisit this later.

.. highlight:: java

============
Tabular Data
============

While arrays (aka: :doc:`ValueVector <./vector>`) represent a one-dimensional sequence of
homogeneous values, data often comes in the form of two-dimensional sets of
heterogeneous data (such as database tables, CSV files...). Arrow provides
several abstractions to handle such data conveniently and efficiently.

Fields
======

Fields are used to denote the particular columns of a table.
A field, i.e. an instance of `Field`_, holds together a field name, a data
type and some optional metadata

.. code-block:: Java

    // Create a column A with utf8 string column and metadata
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.ArrowType;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Field;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.FieldType;

    Map<String, String> metadata = new HashMap<>();
    metadata.put("A", "Id card");
    metadata.put("B", "Passport");
    metadata.put("C", "Visa");
    Field document = new Field("document", new FieldType(true, new ArrowType.Utf8(), /*dictionary*/ null, metadata), /*children*/ null);

Schemas
=======

A `Schema`_ describes the overall structure of a two-dimensional dataset such

> as a table.  It holds a sequence of fields together with some optional

Author: Updated

schema-wide metadata (in addition to per-field metadata).

.. code-block:: Java

    // Create a schema describing datasets with two columns:
    // a int32 column "A" and a utf8-encoded string column "B"
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.ArrowType;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Field;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.FieldType;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Schema;

    Map<String, String> metadata = new HashMap<>();
    metadata.put("K1", "V1");
    metadata.put("K2", "V2");
    Field a = new Field("A", FieldType.nullable(new ArrowType.Int(32, true)), null);
    Field b = new Field("B", FieldType.nullable(new ArrowType.Utf8()), null);

>     Schema schema = new Schema(java.util.Arrays.asList(a, b), metadata);

Reviewer: import java.util.Arrays?

Author: Updated

Tables
======

There is not a object or implementation of Table on java side. More close definition

> like a table could be VectorSchemaRoot (see the next section).

Reviewer: IMO we don't need a whole section for this. In the next section we can say something like "VectorSchemaRoot is somewhat analogous to tables and record batches in the other Arrow implementations in that they all are 2D datasets, but the usage is different."

Author: Deleted and added as a note on VectorSchemRoot

    VectorSchemaRoot vectorSchemaRoot = new VectorSchemaRoot(fields, vectors);

The vectors within a :class:`VectorSchemaRoot` could be loaded/unloaded via :class:`VectorLoader` and :class:`VectorUnloader`.
:class:`VectorLoader` and :class:`VectorUnloader` handles converting between :class:`VectorSchemaRoot` and :class:`ArrowRecordBatch` (

> representation of a RecordBatch :doc:`IPC <../format/IPC.rst>` message ). Examples as below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
representation of a RecordBatch :doc:`IPC <../format/IPC.rst>` message). Examples as below
```

    // 0 indicates start index (inclusive) and 5 indicated length (exclusive).
    VectorSchemaRoot newRoot = vectorSchemaRoot.slice(0, 5);

.. _`Field`: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/java/reference/org/apache/arrow/vector/types/pojo/Field.html
.. _`Schema`: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/java/reference/org/apache/arrow/vector/types/pojo/Schema.html

> .. _`Flight`: https://github.com/apache/arrow/tree/master/java/flight/flight-core/src/main/java/org/apache/arrow/flight

Reviewer: Link to the API docs instead?

Author: Updated
